All right. Good afternoon, minister and officials.
Welcome to the Social Services and Community Select Committee.
We have you for an hour this afternoon on this
appropriation in your role as Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage, and
obviously the department.
So look, welcome. If you want to introduce yourselves and then kick off with
introductory comments, and then we'll move to questions.
Good. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I'm covering the media as well, aren't I?
Or... Yes. Arts, Culture and Heritage and Media. Is that right?
I think it's, yes, exactly.
Yes.
Yep.
Okay. Very good. Well,
thank you very much for the invitation.
I've got my chief executive here,
Mac,
and the deputy secretary and
various others, if there are any particular questions that you have
that we want to get into. I thought I'd start off with just
recalling some of the highlights of the
wider sector.
And we think of, I want to acknowledge Kate Hawley, for her excellent Academy
Award-winning work with costume design for Phantom.
Mm.
I think we need to acknowledge that success.
I think we should also acknowledge Apirana Mahu Pae, with the great
success of his film, Tina,
going around the world.
The Ockham Book Award winner,
Nathanua Persall-Kecsey
should be greatly successful. And then just in the broader context of if you think
of the vibrancy of the sector, the Aotearoa Art Fair, which I attended, was
the biggest yet, with 65 galleries from 25 countries and more than 200 works on
display. So a lot going on in the arts, creative,
and cultural sector. I could name many other things.
But I think
if we were to
draw a conclusion, I would say that
many New Zealanders continue to
do both well here in New Zealand, but also on the global stage.
The Budget 2026 continues our very, very significant
investment in the arts, culture, and heritage space, $460
million
in '26, '27, $1.7 billion
over four years.
I suppose one of the more significant things in the-
Budget was having secured 185 million to ensure
the domestic screen production rebate can
continue, and that's something that has been
budgeted for at a modest level for a number of years, and every year
there's been a scramble and a top-up.
And so we've
put that into a more
appropriate setting,
because it's a key growth area for New Zealand, supporting jobs and international
connections.
We've made some savings over the four-year period,
a 2%
ask for saving across the board,
as we have right across our government.
And
it would be nice to come into
this role with a budget surplus and lots of money
to spend.
That, unfortunately, has never been our experience
on this side of the House. We usually come in with a big
deficit, which we're trying to climb our way out of, and leave the surplus
for others to enjoy.
So we hope and pray that this time we'll be
blessed with
being in power long enough to enjoy the surpluses when they come, and to be
able to
invest some further funds. But in the meantime, we have to be careful with our
money, and that's what we're doing.
What else can I say?
Just in terms of the broader creative setting,
you will recall last year Amplify was the
strategy document that we worked towards with three
key pillars. Investing for maximum impact,
making sure that the money that we do put in, that 400-odd million, is
leveraging also private sector and philanthropic
investment. Secondly, nurturing talent, building that pipeline of talent,
and connecting well with the education sector on that.
And then finally, reducing barriers to growth, thinking about that
regulatory context, and there's much we can talk about there
if people are interested. So I'll leave it at that and
offer myself up to some questioning.
Thank you, Minister. First question, Rachel.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Minister.
So I'd like to ask some questions around the cuts in this year's
budget, and just to indicate to the Chair, I'd like some sustained-
Sustained
... questioning.
We will. As many as we can.
Yeah. So
you mentioned at the beginning that there's continued investment in the arts, but
there's significant cuts this time in the budget.
So my first question is around cuts to Creative New Zealand.
We've seen cuts to their budget, and as a result, 23 jobs
proposed to be cut from Creative New Zealand.
So my first question is,
how do you expect Creative New Zealand to be able to
Amplify, deliver on your objectives, and support the
growth of the creative industry when you're cutting 23 jobs from that organization?
Well, thank you for the question. I think you got the word "cut" in five times.
And I think
what people will need to be conscious of, the fact is that what we're talking about
is 2%,
and savings that has been required right across
government. And I just remind people who are tuning in
on their TV screens and their crystal sets across the country listening in to this
debate, that notwithstanding all the
savings that we've made, this budget is still forecasting an
$11.4 billion deficit. So as a
country, we're spending more than we're earning.
And we inherited very substantial deficits when we came into power in
2023. And we're trying to get a path back to
surplus, which is what we left the country in
2017 when we last were in power. And why does that
matter? Because if you're running up big deficits
every year, you're effectively asking the next generation to
pay for the things that you're enjoying today.
So we're asking our kids and our grandkids to pay for stuff that we're doing today,
and we don't think that's appropriate.
That's why we've got a plan to get back to surplus.
And
that's not easy. It is much easier, as Ms.
Boyack's colleagues will know when they were in government, it's much easier just
to throw money out there, run up a deficit, borrow more
money, and get lots of applause and thanks from
everybody. It's much harder to be more disciplined in our spending.
So that's what we're doing. And in relation to Creative New Zealand, of course,
what we're doing, and I've appointed an excellent
chair there, and
the board has appointed a new CEO. And my simple focus there
is that over the last couple of decades,
the amount that Creative New Zealand has spent on their
administration,
as opposed to money that goes out the door to artists, has grown and
grown and grown. And so what we've asked the new leadership
team is there to reduce the amount that they're spending on administration
so that more money can go out the door.
And so my expectation is that we'll get an extra $4
million out the door to artists
from the rearrangements that have been made at Creative New Zealand.
I think that is the right thing to do.
I want to dig into this actually, because I met with a group of artists in
Palmerston North last week about the changes at a regional level, and their
concern is they were given only one month to submit an ROI
on administering the new system that's been set up.
And they have a lot of unanswered questions, one of which is, there will
be an administrative cost to actually giving out that money through the regions.
How is that going to be paid for? Or is the money going
into that new regional approach only going to be the money that gets to artists,
and those organizations expected to actually deliver the administrative burden
themselves?
Well, I imagine that'll be details of the ROI that
Creative New Zealand is working their way through, and there'll be a range of-
There'll be a range of options put forward.
But yes, our expectation is that putting the funding closer to
the community, and using organizations that are currently
already set up to distribute funds in many respects,
it varies in different regions, will be a more efficient way of doing it, rather
than having
a very large apparatus in Wellington taking up a
very substantial slice of the money available.
Mm-hmm.
And we want to see more of it out the door to the artists.
So why would those regions that don't have organizations already established, like
Palmerston North, Manawatu, only given one month for an ROI, where they're actually
having to set up a brand new trust in order to deliver this model?
Well, that's a question that can be asked to Creative New Zealand's board.
I don't have the details of how long they particularly allow
the process to develop and we can come back to you with some reasons
on that. That's not the degree of detail that I'd get into.
Okay.
Supplementary.
Yeah, look, I've heard also over many, many years from people who are looking to
apply for funding for Creative New Zealand, it's a very, very bureaucratic process,
and can be really onerous.
What I'm really interested in is what the balance of funding has been.
You said obviously too much money went to the bureaucracy, if you like, and too
little went out the door in terms of grants.
But if we can track what it looks like over time in terms of the growth of the
bureaucracy, then starting turning it down again-
Yes
... versus the trajectory for actually grants
getting out on the ground.
Well, that's very much what the challenge that I've given to
the board, and they're very upfront and they're doing a great job.
And so they're working their way through a process at the moment.
But the goal, like I say,
is to get at least an extra $4
million out the door to artists,
in grants of the wide variety, whether it's music, whether it's
poetry, whether it's writing or drama or you name it.
All those things are getting that money out the door in terms of grants,
rather than being spent on
detailed administration here in Wellington.
Still leaving substantial overheads for administration.
But I just think over time it had grown and it needed to be pruned back.
And you'd expect to be able to report and track that?
Yes.
Good.
A supplementary on this, Minister, and it's just a discussion about cuts, sort of
got me thinking about an orchard. In an orchard, you sometimes need to prune it
so that you can have actually better growth going forward.
So you've kind of touched on that with more than $4 million.
But I'm just wondering, what is the thinking of
yourself and the ministry about pruning the orchard, so to speak, so that you can
have better, stronger growth in the creative sector?
It's not necessarily a metaphor that I would use.
My simple view, which is one that's shared by the
Creative New Zealand board, is that
there's two ways you can spend your money and how it's developed is, one is that
there is the administrative overhead of running Creative New
Zealand and having an office in Wellington and
employing
a number of people. And then the second element is grants that are
put out to the
artistic community.
And my concern is that over time, that proportion on
administration had grown out of whack with the amount that was going
out the door in terms of grants. Now, there had been a big increase, of course,
during COVID when there'd been extra money sloshing around in the system, but it
hadn't come back down fast enough.
And so our simple objective is to change that ratio so that
less is being spent at administration in Wellington, more is going out the door
to the artists-
Good
... directly. And that's what we're setting out to achieve, and I think that's the
right thing to do.
Thank you. Ka rangi. Your question.
Thank you.
Can you confirm that the 27.5 million
that's been cut
over-
Over four years.
So the 27.5 million is that
cuts over the four years. And then, thank you.
And then over the three years, the Ministry of
Culture and Heritage is expected to find a total savings of
150 million.
So that's,
if we take off that 27.5 million, we've got
122 million, and that's about an average of
57.8
million per year.
That's including these cuts of 2% in the first
year to the public services, 5% in the second, and 5% in the third year.
So could you just confirm that
as well as that 27.5 million, there is another
122 million-ish that needs to be cut?
Well, that is
the future predictions
as announced in terms of the overall public sector.
We're trying to, A, reduce the overall headcount
back to somewhere close to,
again just for people tuning in, if we looked
at the core public service, 47,000 people employed in
2017. We come back six years later and it's
63,000. It's grown by a very substantial
amount.
Meantime, the population has grown, so some growth is
justified. So our proposal is to get back to
55,000. Not all the way back to 47, but back to 55.
And we think we can do that and still have a fine, productive, and efficient public
service. So that's one element. Another element is
the projections that the Minister of Finance and I, wearing another hat,
Public Service Commissioner, talked about savings of 2% this year and then
5% for the next two years. The out-
Flow of that is not detailed in this budget, because
it's very much a discussion still to be had.
And there may be some areas where
it's easier to find those savings, particularly areas where there's been
significant increases over the last few years.
There may be other areas where it won't be appropriate, and so we haven't made
those decisions.
So at the moment, you don't have any sense on how those
further 122 million in cuts is going
to impact artists?
Well, we haven't made the decisions to actually do that yet.
What we've indicated is right across government, we want to have that savings.
And how it's going to roll out across the various
departments and different sort of categories of spending is yet
to be decided. That's a real challenge for us. And I might add, not easy.
And like I say,
much easier to have lots of extra money to throw around, but that is not something
that we've found ourselves with the ability.
Thank you, Minister. I can see in the summary of initiatives that
it's clear that it has
2% cuts for year one of the budget, 5%
cuts for year two, and 5% for year three.
And so that's what I'm asking.
Can you give us any indication of the impact that that's going to have on
artists?
John, did you want to clarify something?
That's correct. In the summary of initiatives, there is
113.5 million
budget savings that has to be ascertained.
As ministers outlined, we're still having to work through that process.
So it is premature to start talking through what the impact will be
until we have, and worked through with the cultural system
how we would
divvy up-
Kia ora
... the savings in relation to-
And I thank you. And I understand that
5% and 5%, because you also administer to
sport and recreation.
That's right.
Do you know what split that would be?
Like, would it be-
No. All those decisions have yet to be made.
They're decisions for ministers to make when
we look across the whole of the government sector.
Everybody's been tasked. We've got to make this
5% and 5% across the board. But there are many discussions to be had
as to exactly where that will fall and where.
Thank you, Minister.
And so there's a lot of water to go under the bridge.
I think it's-
Thank you. A question, Maureen.
Okay. Thank you. Can I have a go, Maureen?
Minister, I'll just move on to media and communications.
I note that-- and this is a decision that's been made about the
Broadcasting Standards Authority.
So I'm assuming there will be some savings made
from the disestablishment of that.
Have you given any thought to whether that will be
reprioritized within the vote for-
Yes
... news media or arts, culture, and heritage?
No, we haven't made the final decisions on that yet.
But yes, there will be modest savings associated with that.
But the BSA is not a huge department. It's about a million dollars a year.
And so
we'll be looking at that. We've obviously got to pass legislation to
repeal the legislation that sustains the BSA, the
Broadcasting Standards Authority,
first. And
there are a couple of nuances that need to be sort of dealt with there because
it interacts with some court procedures and the electoral
reform and various other things. So, that's what we're working our way through, and
we'll have the legislation in the House.
Once we pass that and the BSA is disestablished,
then it may well be that we've got some
resources freed up. It's very nice.
The story that one most often hears in government is
new departments being created,
which is all very good, but it shouldn't just be a ratchet always going up and more
and more. Sometimes there is an opportunity to say, "Well, actually, we no
longer need to do that anymore, and
we can live without it." And so that's what we've done there.
A supplementary on that, Minister.
What is your thinking around this new media landscape and
sort of mechanisms for
people to have some framework if they don't think someone has
represented their position or views appropriately-
Yeah, well-
... in the public sphere?
Yes.
What's your thinking for the best approach going forward?
Well, the normal laws of defamation and things like that
continue to apply,
obviously. So,
that is a
legal framework with which anybody who's talking in the public sphere
needs to be conscious of.
And then
ultimately, we have a choice between trying to
regulate speech across the board,
and
as is obvious to everybody, the way that we get our information and entertainment
has changed very dramatically. It used to be just these were the
broadcasters and these were the papers, and that was that.
But now you've got this whole new world of
TikTok, and YouTube, and
podcasts, and all sorts of things.
Now we can try and regulate every iteration of that,
down to
every
TikToker, or we can realize that actually, maybe the world's
changed quite substantially. People have got a whole range or suite
of options available to them. And if they don't like it, probably the best solution
is to turn it off and listen to something else, and that basic market force
operates. And then we recognize that, well, yeah, but there are some people
who naturally think it's quite appropriate to
have a higher level of standard for journalists
and people who call themselves journalists.
And so our sort of working assumption is that the Media Council
would be the regulator for those. And people who want to join
up and say, "I'm a journalist, these are my-"
Um, hold myself to a higher standard, and I'm
accountable to a process through the Media Council.
And then there will be some people who won't want to do that, and then
they'll have to explain to their viewers or their listeners why not.
And again, people will have a choice whether or not they listen to them or take
them seriously. And that's my suggestion.
All right. Thank you.
Right, new question. Andy.
Yeah, look, I was interested in asking about the
commemoration of past military campaigns.
There are two particular areas I'm interested in.
One is the Ngā Tapuwae program, which is...
I was listening at Featherston the other day
to Chris Pugsley and co, and they basically said that we've basically
backed away from what was done during the
World War I commemorations. And now the app, I think, is no longer
operative,
and the website's a bit clunky.
And obviously, we say we will remember them, but it makes it darn sight harder to
remember people when those functions are not being backed up.
And if I can throw the second one in there as well,
the carillon in Wellington. A huge amount of money being spent on
an enormously important building.
The ability to play the bells, and I've noted that
it's not a very common
skill,
and I've noted that there doesn't seem to be any money to actually pay for anybody
to actually play the carillon when it's
operating. So I'd be really interested in both of those, because obviously you want
to save money but can't overdo it.
In relation to the second one, I can confirm that I have played
the carillon.
Have you? You could have a gig then.
But I can't necessarily claim to have played it well.
And I have to confess, I was a little skeptical about
all the money being put into earthquake strengthening until I went in and
saw the bells, which are-
They're quite heavy
... reasonably heavy, yes. Very heavy, in fact.
And so I have a greater understanding of that now.
But in terms of the details of around,
we had a carillon-
Carillonnist
... carillonnist for a long period of time, and he's
retired. And so having a replacement, and probably we don't have an apprenticeship
devoted to that. And so that's a task that I'm sure Mac can
give us some details.
You're on.
So on the carillonnist, we're working with the
National School of Music, working with Wellington City Council to
look at building a pipeline of talent to help play that.
We have recitals that are going to be played once a month.
We're working closely with the Carillon School of Australia,
Society of Australia, sorry. On the Ngā Tapuwae,
we're not
forgetting anyone.
It's digitally archived, which is a little different to when you just archive.
So digitally archiving means that all the information is still
accessible and still available.
Yeah.
And on the app, the app actually was decommissioned back in
2019/20.
Yeah.
Because it was the
process around licensing and editing and coding was really expensive,
and there wasn't the uptake. So those are the two issues there.
Thank you.
New question. Ora nei.
Tena koe, Minister. I just have a couple of questions.
Really, one question, but two different entities.
And the question is, what impact will the $27
million worth of shavings, I'll call it shavings,
from this particular budget over the next four years, what impact, if any,
will that have on Te Matatini?
Well,
the 2% savings that we've asked across the board
do include Te Matatini, like everybody else.
Everybody's got to have
a chance to find those savings.
But Matatini, of course, continues to be,
if we look at this period of government,
of the coalition government, the single biggest area of
new and additional funding was to Matatini, which is now
funded at, was 19 million, now 18 million after the savings,
and continues to be a very significant investment.
But because it allies so
fundamentally with our core strategy around Amplify, which is growing the number
of New Zealanders that engage with the arts in the
broader sense, because it is extraordinarily popular, and
draws in communities and people. I went to
some of the regional ones a couple of months ago.
Big crowds, big engagement with the arts
in that capacity. And then secondly, of course, it also has
huge opportunities for projecting our culture on the
global stage. And we see
Te Matatini-- Well, we see the kapa haka experts
traveling the world and in high demand.
So, yes, they'll need to find the 2%
savings like everybody else, but they continue to be funded at a
substantial level.
Supplementary. Actually, no, it's not a supplementary.
It's about the second entity that I would wish to ask a question on
behalf of, and that is Te Papa. Te Papa has enormous
responsibility. In particular, there's a repatriation program
that has been running for many years.
What impacts will these cuts have on the ability of
Te Papa, not Maui 2.0, which I do understand received $10
million funding in this year's budget.
We're talking specifically about the work that Te Papa is
responsible for and doing, as you say, what this government is
committed to, which is the promotion and the amplification of our
culture to international audiences.
Yep. Well, Te Papa likewise needs to find that 2% saving.
See, the thing is, we could've
I had a choice. I could say, "Well, the Minister of Finance
has asked for a 2% saving across the
sector."
I could've said, "Well,
let's exempt XYZ,"
and then
the rest end up having to find 5% savings.
Or if I exempt XYZ and A, B, and C, then the rest
have to do 10%. And so I figured 2% is manageable across the board, and so
everybody's got to find their way.
And so my very strong-- I have an excellent new chair in
Te Papa, an excellent board,
and they are very focused on
ensuring that the resources that Te
Papa has is focused on the delivery of
good content, new exhibitions that they're pushing out into the world.
But the focus on also raising funds, so we've enabled them, of course, to
charge international visitors. And that's developed a new stream of
income. They have considerable facilities available
to them for
exhibitions
and
things such as that, as well as the opportunity for greater use of philanthropy.
So they're going to have to work hard, but we believe they'll be able to do a good
job.
Supplementary, Louise.
I think you've almost answered my question, Minister, but it was around
what encouragement or incentives are there for all of
these entities to become more commercial and to
create income rather than rely on government funding.
Well,
there'll always be a role for government funding. We'll continue to do that.
But yes, a core part of our Amplify strategy is to leverage
that government investment through
other sources. If you think of the Heritage New Zealand
area,
for example, they have
some considerable assets in
my neck of the woods in Newmarket, a historic place right in the center of
Newmarket. There are opportunities to also
raise some money through wise use of that property in order to
fund the preservation of those things.
In reference to heritage, of course, it's worth remembering, again, going back
to that Amplify strategy and removing of regulatory controls, the most
useful thing we can do in the heritage space is something that we have done as this
government, which is bring some common sense back to the earthquake strengthening
legislation.
We can spend a poultice on stuff, but if we haven't got
some
common sense in that law, then we'd always be chasing our tail and heritage
will be
neglected and having demolition by neglect in this country.
So that's the number one thing I've done for heritage,
and I'm very pleased that we've managed to achieve that.
Supplementary, Rachel.
Thank you. I've got a supplementary in relation to Te Papa and private
funding.
I've been copied into a letter from the Te Papa Foundation to you,
registering their concerns about the donation cap.
Yes.
And the concern that this will have a chilling effect on the ability for private
philanthropy to support Te Papa. And so I'm wondering if you've got a response to
that,
just given you've mentioned that's an important part of supporting Te Papa.
Yep.
But the foundation are concerned they won't be able to do that with a change to
that cap.
Yes, and we've heard those concerns.
Of course,
people are able to donate $100,000 under the
change that we've made. It still gets a full rebate.
It's over $100,000 and we've certainly heard that
concern.
Supplementary, Caroline.
Thank you. So Minister,
you talked about that you're confident that
they'll still be able to be good outputs.
Do you think that the arts community who will be able to
still output at the same level that they are now with the cuts?
Well,
obviously,
the creative
sector is not entirely
reliant on government. I went to
TAFE, and there was a man there who was a nature or whatever, and stood
up and said
when they got their award, "If no one's going to help you, just do it yourself." I
thought that was quite a good quote.
And if you've got great music or art,
people will find a way to
take their creativity to the world.
What we do, though, have is many opportunities to support those as best
we can. But as a country, of course, we've got to live within our means, and so
we've got to be careful about how we do that.
And so my goal and the focus of the ministry and the focus
of the boards across the sector is to make sure that we get the best
outcome with the resources that we've got, and that we're not wasting
any
potential. And so where it's appropriate, people get the help they can
get. But in the meantime, I've got every confidence that where there's a will,
there's always a way.
Thank you, Minister.
Just a supplementary on those cuts, because
we know that in the '25, '26 budget, Ngā
Taonga Sound and Vision, we've had seven roles, and they hadn't
reached that. They'd only done 75% of the
storing of our culture, of our stories.
And so I think it was around seven roles that were disestablished,
a kaupapa Maori group as well that had only been just brought in
two years before. So looking forward to this budget, we've got more cuts-
And that was sort of a project that had come to an end rather
than a-
A project that started with 75%, knowing that only
75% would be completed, so maybe was expecting the last 25
to be completed as well. So I guess it's the way we look at it.
But if I'm talking about that Ngā Taonga Sound and Vision,
another
208,000 of cuts
during this
'26, '27. So,
with that on top of the cuts already happening, are they going
to at least
the completion
of... And we're talking about our old archives that are being
digitalized, right? And so they're things like
TV, they're things like having older people speaking, and some of that
I'd say look, that's a wonderful thing, and what we've managed to achieve with the
archiving, digitization of the archives is a
treasure trove for future generations.
And we've managed to achieve a lot,
and they'll continue to achieve a lot.
It's just,
on behalf of people in New Zealand, we're asking for a 2% saving.
And, I think many people tuning in, some of whom might run their own
businesses around the country, and they'll often find
that revenue drops by 2% for a whole host of reasons.
It might be the petrol prices have gone up, or there's something going on
internationally or something's that...
And people have to be able to adjust and live within the means available.
Like I say, I'd far rather be in this chair in a situation with a big
surplus and a big increase to arts funding, and that would be a wonderful thing to
offer. But that, unfortunately, is not where we found ourselves.
We find ourselves in a $12 billion hole that we're trying to climb our way out
of. And we've got to get a path back to surplus.
And once we've done that, once we've got some growth back in the economy, and
then we've got more choices about what we spend our money on.
I'll ask one last supplementary, Minister.
In 2024, it was estimated that the arts and creative sector contributed
$17.5 billion to the New Zealand economy.
How much of that was because the government was paying for it, and how much of it
was because the creative sector was actually generating income for the
government?
What figure did you have there? I've seen some figures-
$17.5 billion economic contribution estimated in
2024. All the focus sort of on these questions
seems to be on the government propping up the arts and creative sector.
And my question is focused on how much the arts and creative sector actually
generating income itself as a contribution to New Zealand's
economic picture.
Yes, well,
there's
quite a broad definition of
the arts and creative sector. I think it might-- I don't know if it includes
politicians because we tend to be a bit creative sometimes, but
um, the,
um...
No, the point you make is a good one, which is to say,
not everybody
who is a writer or a
musician or a,
across the board, is reliant on government funding.
And many people find a little niche,
and find some way to create a market,
and get it out there. And it would be my observation
of the creative sector generally is that
there's an enormous amount of creativity that goes into the development of the
product, whether it's a string quartet or a play or
a book.
And
my challenge sometimes to parts of the sector is, don't forget you need
to put an equal amount of creativity into the task of persuading people to buy
it
or to go to it or to see it or to come along and visit it.
And
that's just a fact of life. You've got to do that because
funding should follow,
to some extent, where the people are wanting to engage with it.
And so engaging an audience is a fundamental
part of any arts community.
Maureen, was it last supplementary?
Last, last supplementary
Last, last. Well, you just reminded me about it.
But, Minister,
when you talk about the amount that is generated from
arts, culture, and heritage, how do you actually track that?
How do you know, as a minister,
how many albums are sold or-
Some, somebody comes up with a figure and
I'm not sure exactly who, but from time to time there is a
survey done and a figure is put out there
and that's one of the measures that we use for progress.
But I'd be happy to come back to you with the details of exactly who's
done it and when
they're next likely to do it, if you'd like.
That would be helpful. Thank you.
New question, Rachel.
Thank you. I've got a new primary question.
I think given how broad this conversation's been, could have been a sup.
You've talked about living within our means.
One question, not commentary, please.
And,
yep. We've talked about living within our means.
Can you understand the frustration of local artists when they're seeing
cuts to
Creative New Zealand, cuts to NZSO, cuts to Te Matatini, cuts to the
ballet, but $40 million going into an events
fund to support Robbie Williams, Linkin Park, Post Malone,
so international artists to come and play in New Zealand, where there are cuts
going into support for local New Zealand artists to grow
their skills and their audiences?
Well,
look, yes, it is a challenge, for the
broader sector. Like most of the government, we're needing to find
savings, and savings are never easy.
But they are necessary in the context that we have.
In terms of economic development, I mean, you might say the same thing
about putting extra money into the film sector, which is what this
budget has done.
And ultimately, governments on behalf of New Zealanders have to make a judgment
about
when to invest in
economic development activities designed to
draw people into the country and to get a level of
activity following a period of um-
Frankly, recession that we'd had over a period of time.
And so, that is what the
economic development investment had been about, getting
some activity back into our cities, drawing
tourism from across the country. And
as part of that, the big event has been part of that process.
And yes, it can be rightly
challenged as to, is that the best way to spend the money?
But we as a
government resolved that we needed some stimulus during that
time. And then we can carry on having discussions about where it's
best to go forward.
Have you considered just-- I've got one something else.
Have you considered having a visa in place so that when
those international artists come to New Zealand,
there is a requirement for New Zealand artists to actually be on the
ticket so that they get exposure and access to their
licensing revenue through the likes of that club?
Well, yes, we have considered those sorts of settings.
It is quite often the case that a New Zealand artist is involved
in
the pre-production or not pre-production,
but the curtain raiser, as it were, and that is often the case.
Whether you make it a rule,
some countries like to have lots of rules.
The Aussies always have rules for everything.
We tend to be a bit more freewheeling, but that's something that we have
considered.
New question, Reuben.
Thank you. And thank you, minister
Do you still have conversations with your board chairs?
Yes.
You do. Do you take notes?
No.
Do you record the boards?
Do you know if they record the boards?
No, I don't know, but I would assume that they don't.
Have you issued,
since the conversation with the new chair of TVNZ, have you
issued any advice or guidance to your chairs in your system
around what's in scope and what's out of scope for
conversations?
No.
Do you think you possibly could have or should have?
Why would I do that?
Given that she had raised an issue that if you had continued
the conversation, would have seen you in breach of the broadcasting
act. Do you not think
for yourself and chair-
Well-
...
that space
Well, yes, maybe. But look, I think it's pretty fundamental.
To do my role properly, I appoint a number of chairs
across a number of organizations, and I
see it very much as my job to just call them up randomly at random
times and check what's going on. And sometimes to put them on the spot
and, "What are you focused on? What's happening here?
What's going on?" And I see that very
much as my role. And I don't carry a little notebook around with me when I do it.
And it's about the sort of free flow of
discussion,
and that's the way I sort of operate and seems to work.
Do you think
do you think that it risks creating a section or
cover
that a minister could
sleep outside of the law and have a conversation around
subject matter for news coverage content, and that there would be no
evidence that they had or hadn't done?
Yes, but the problem is if you take that sort of
line,
then it would be safer never to talk to your chair,
or to only do it when you've got a formal meeting in place.
And that may make you safer,
but I've got every confidence that the people involved and myself, we know
which is the right side of the line to be on, and we have conversations, and we
need to do that. Otherwise,
the most common topic of
conversation, one of the topics of conversation with board chairs
is over upcoming appointments to the board.
And I value their direct views. And you've got to have a
discussion, "Well, who do we think we need?" And those are the sorts of questions
that quite often I talk through and then asking, "How's it going?
How's the business going? What's the priorities?"
And in the context of Radio New Zealand and TVNZ,
the two things that I'm most interested in are, is the audience
growing? Because we're paying for this as a country for
Radio New Zealand, and we don't pay TVNZ directly, but
we own it. And so we want to make sure that they're
attracting an audience and that they're competing well against the
alternatives. And then secondly, I want to know whether they've got a plan to
increase the levels of trust that New Zealanders have in them.
And so those are a couple of themes that I
quite often reverse to.
Sure. So just to pick up on the point there in that answer around revenue
and the ability for RNZ, TVNZ, and any other
news outlet in New Zealand to be able
to generate sufficient revenue to be viable or
ideally return a profit.
Quite some time ago, more than a year ago, you said you were going to take
immediate action in that space. You've since said that you are watching
closely the moves in Australia to introduce
their equivalent of a fair digital news bargaining bill.
How closely are you watching that, and how much longer do you need to watch
that for before you're going to be able to do something,
anything,
that will ensure that there is a revenue stream for news content created in New
Zealand that is currently taken and shared on online
platforms with no revenue source for local
Although the question is standard, that wasn't a supplementary and a primary.
I thank you, Mr Chair. Well,
I can advise the member that I continue to
watch Australia very closely,
and
continue to be conscious of the challenges
that new technology brings across the
sector. We've done what we can. Probably been more helpful, I
suppose, in the broadcasting space than the print space.
We've been able to do away with out-of-date laws when it
comes to Sunday advertising and
there've been other gains made. But in terms of
the Fair Digital,
so-called, marketing bill that's still on the books but
is not being progressed at the moment.
But we're watching how it unfolds in Australia.
Minister, I'll ask a couple of questions just sort of on a regional lens, which is
of particular interest to those of us who are electorate MPs,
and particularly representing large electorate
parts of the country.
What is the strategy to ensure there's
good outreach into communities? And I'll just say, for example, Queenstown Lakes,
just speaking personally, is the second most creative place in the country
according to
information
index on a
per capita basis, and then you-
Second most creative, did you say?
Yes, second only to Wellington, ahead of Auckland, I'm pleased to say.
And, you can-
That's not in relation to accounting.
That's-
No, it's on a per capita basis.
Oh, okay.
As a percentage of people employed in the arts and creative sector.
And then say in Gore, we just had the 10-day Tussey Country Music
Festival.
Yes.
And, the country's pre-eminent
country music festival. So, we've got these cool things happening.
Absolutely.
And they're happening all across the country.
How does
the ministry sort of work with the very long country to
ensure that we support these?
Well, of course, that is one of the
goals of the changes with Creative New Zealand,
to get closer to the regions.
For a very long time it's been very Wellington-based and focused and
some regions have done better than others.
And you're right to point out that there are
some regions in New Zealand that are growing substantially faster than the others,
and your area around Queenstown is one and Tauranga is another one.
And so, from time to time you need to sort of adjust these things and make sure
that everybody's getting a fair crack.
So I'd say that.
In
terms of the media side of things, of course, one of the things that we funded in
the last budget was
an extra boost to local democracy reporting and open justice.
And that has helped to some modest degree
for some
more local journalism to be developed and fed into the
system and so that's one useful thing we've been able to do.
Sup.
Yeah. Thank you, Minister. Just
in tune with the regional, I guess, lens.
Just want to ask about connectivity and I know that as
Broadcasting Minister you have helped along with some
towers and some more connectivity around in the regions.
That's tomorrow.
And, um-
Different bike tomorrow. It's more my
communications hat although-
Yes
... in terms of emergencies and media-
Media, yes. You did the AM radio-
Yes
... towers.
Yes.
Lots of time for that in a different meeting.
Yes. Well, no, but the only point I'd make in relation,
the primary way that we fund
media
for
emergency purposes is through Radio New Zealand, which has the-
Yes
... the primary task of doing that.
There is also-
The contribution
... it's worth noting a contribution made by commercial radio, particularly in
some of our rural areas, and we acknowledge that, and they would like us to help
them more on that front and that's something that we give some thought to
and
Minister Jones, of course, is responsible for the
Regional Infrastructure Fund, which may have some ability to help in
some modest way. So there is a bit of a
piece of work that we're looking at there.
Thank you.
I'll just remind Minister Leigh that the chair is the arbiter of whether a
question's in scope or not.
Go to Andy, supplementary.
Yeah, just a supplementary off your one to provide a bit of balance to, we've got
to look after the regions. But also, you did mention
the money that gets spent in Wellington, but there are a large number of national
institutions which are based in Wellington.
Well, indeed.
And it's-
And excellent institutions that they are too.
Very good. Very good. I'm glad you say so.
But I'm really interested in just making sure that you are going to keep the
funding
to the level, and obviously they've got to raise money themselves, as we've already
had Harper mention. But also things like the ballet, Royal New Zealand Ballet and
the Symphony Orchestra.
Yeah.
That they will have the revenue that they need, but they also need to get out
around the country as well and
showcase what they do.
Yeah, well, I-
So not just based in Wellington.
No, well, indeed. But, I
think a challenge that all
such
groups are facing is, ultimately they're competing for
attention in a world where people have so
much
in front of them. The
Symphony Orchestra is competing against sitting on the couch scrolling
their TikTok, ultimately. And I think there will come a time when
people get fed up with the scrolling and get back out and
go to the symphony.
But the
task of all those organizations is to engage people,
and to reconnect And make the case for why it's better to get off the couch
and go out and listen to a local musician.
And we support as best we can, but
ultimately, that's the fundamental task that everybody faces.
And you're confident the level of support at the moment and the level that's
predicted to be ongoing, because obviously there are changes proposed here, is
adequate for what they need to do?
Yes. But it's going to require doing things slightly differently in some cases.
There may well be a number of entities
that all have their own sort of systems and
financial systems and HR systems, and we may be having to come up with more
efficient ways of doing things.
And that's just the challenge that everybody faces is we've got to find some
efficiencies and make sure as much money as possible that we have
available is getting into the hands of those who can best use it.
New question, Laura.
Oh, thank you. My question's about the game
developer rebate scheme for
new gaming.
Yep.
I know there's about $40 million each year allocated for that.
I also noted that to be eligible-
That's a-
... you have to be part of a studio that has a minimum operating expenditure of
$250,000, which is quite high if you were, say, a new
game developer trying to get into the industry, and this might be a bit
technical.
Well, I just think it's the economic development
portfolio of the gaming
Okay. It's New Zealand on Air is who it's distributed through?
Okay.
Yes.
We can ask that to someone else.
Yeah, you can ask.
New question. Karori.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister.
Minister, you keep saying 2% across the board of
savings, but can you confirm that this is not the case for the arts?
It is 2%, 5%,
5% for the next three years.
I just need artists to properly understand the numbers.
By all means. What you need to understand is it's 2% this year.
Well, that's there. And then, the
Minister of Finance and the government's indicated that the next two years,
we'll be looking for 5% savings across the board.
But the discussions, the debates,
the who's it coming from, how it's actually going to operate,
is very much what we're going to be focused on in the next few months
and if re-elected. So
where the 2% has hit and where it's taken
place is absolutely right there. The 2%, 5%, yes, we've got
to find those savings across government, and including in this portfolio,
but exactly how, where, is still something very much to
be considered and resolved. And it's possible that
the
nuances between different areas of government might be different.
So it's not all set in stone.
Thank you, Minister, for clarifying that.
So
there's 5% in year two, 5% in the year three,
which is different projections to the majority
of the ministries, which say 2% and 2%.
And I just want to really be clear, do you think that
artists have it easy in this country?
No.
And what do you say-
Some do, some don't
... what do you say to them about the fact that there's going to be even less
support?
Well,
I'd say that New Zealand continues to support the arts very substantially,
as we certainly are $1.7 billion over the next four years.
So New Zealanders love the arts. They engage with the arts.
And
we continue to support as best we can as a country.
to the extent that we're doing well as a country,
and we're generating income, the more we can continue to invest
in these things. And it's not a nice-to-have, it's an essential.
Having a strong cultural framework for the country
is very important. That's why we continue to fund it.
Supplementary, Morgan.
Minister, just to follow up on that question.
Some of the artists in West Coast Tasman who are quite independent
and make quite a nice living with their carving and their painting and their
jewelry making and other things,
are they still able to look for government funding should
they so wish?
Well
yes, there's-
Sorry to make you choke, but
There's various funds available, but I think the point you make is
there's a wide range, but the creative sector is very broad.
There is a substantial group of people
who are, in effect, small business people trying to make a living.
They're creating a product, whether it's a painting, piece of jewelry,
fashion,
a whole range of things, stories, that people are
prepared to buy, pay for, and you can make a living doing that.
And that's a great way to make a living.
It can be challenging, though. And you're competing against
all sorts of other
things in a pretty tough world. So that's why we have
some funds available, but it's never enough to cover
everybody's desires.
And
at the moment, we're going through a period where we're trying to get ourselves
back into a
steady state when it comes to our finances.
But nevertheless, we continue to invest very substantially in the arts
and will continue to do so.
New question, Ruby.
Thank you, Chair.
Radio New Zealand faces
5.636 million in cuts over the next four
years.
So a couple of questions on that. At what
point does that start hitting newsroom capacity at RNZ?
Well, we've got every confidence that they were-- They did
have a substantial increase under the previous administration.
And we've taken back some of that.
But they've also continued to invest.
I think I'm going up on
Friday to open up the new facilities in Auckland, which
is
an empty floor that TVNZ had, which is now being used much
more effectively. And that's a very exciting proposition for
RNZ. And I think there'll be many opportunities for synergies
between those two
companies once that's up and running.
So,
I think there's a very bright future for Radio New Zealand.
And they've made
real progress over the last few years in terms of their
reach across New Zealand with the success of their
app and their
news feeds running through various channels.
So, I don't think anybody can say that Radio New Zealand is not
having a real impact in terms of its
core task in New Zealand. That they face competitive
pressures on their morning report flagship.
And so I
put plenty of pressure on them to ask themselves how they're going to sort of do
better, how they're going to grow their audience there.
And with every confidence, they can do that with the budget we've allowed them.
So given that pressure that you've spoken about that RNZ experiences, but that
TVNZ also experiences.
And every other media outlet. I think you'll find NZME and Stuff and all those
others all suffer-
Absolutely
... probably much more substantial economic pressures.
Not Crown-owned companies or not-
No
... not in the vote, not-
Sure
... not in your jurisdiction.
Sure.
But can you assure us
that the financial independence on the Crown will never be used intentionally or
otherwise as leverage over editorial decisions?
Oh, no. Of course not. They're independent and
they're a very important part of our democracy because of that.
We certainly would never claim to
deliver things from the podium of proof in this government.
So-
Hear hear. No, last applies.
Minister, the reductions are inevitable,
whether they be 2%, 5%, anything. With that, the
question really is,
are these
entities, are the sector or the sectors across this spot, arts, culture
and heritage, expected to continue to deliver the outputs that they have
over these previous four years, over the previous terms, with a reduction
of funding?
With the funding, I'll rephrase that, funding being
reduced, with funding being reduced, does that then equate to
ministers, the minister, and the government reducing its
expectations on each of these entities and their outputs?
So, or is the minister and the government still expecting the same output
with less money?
Well, expecting the same output with less money
is one way of describing expecting an increase in
productivity. And that may be appropriate in some places, it may
be less appropriate in other places.
But, yes, we do expect different entities to be
more efficient with the resources that they have and
deliver excellent outcomes.
And there'll be a range of ways of doing that.
But like I say, the 2%
savings are fully expected and required.
We will be having a debate over the next couple of years of exactly where and how
to deal with the future savings that we need to have as a government
in order to,
as an important part of our path back to surplus.
And so, those discussions are still to be had.
And how exactly that falls is something that's very much up for debate over the
next few years.
Thank you, Minister. We will now ask you to switch hats to the Minister for Pacific
Peoples. No, no, switch your officials.
There.
See.
Cheers for that. Thank you.
Thank you.
Last involved.
He's like, "I'm just going to sit here."
100%.
Really?
No.
You know how it goes.
It's not like you, Carmen.
With 15 minutes, we don't have much time.
But we should be fine.
Yeah.
Right. Well, thank you, Minister, and welcome back with your Minister for Pacific
Peoples hat on. I'm not sure if you're being joined by officials.
All right.
It's okay.
What? I'm all man.
Let's go.
I'm sure you can handle it.
We got this.
Here we go.
All right. Well, shall we just ask you just to do a brief
introduction of those who are with you and
introduction to the portfolio?
No.
And from there, we'll move to questions.
Well, warm Pacific greetings, talofa lava, malo e lelei,
ni sa bula, vinaka, kia orana, fakalofa la tu atu,
molo ni, noa ea,
and greetings to you all
this afternoon. And I'm joined here by the Secretary
of Pacific Peoples, Geraldine Clifford-Lindson, and her team,
who are all here ready to answer any particular questions
that you have. Obviously, relatively
new to this role, but I've had a wonderful
couple of months meeting different groups across
the sector
as I have.
And
very conscious of the fact that we-
One of the
stats that have stuck with me is that
roughly 25% or a quarter of the kids at
school in Auckland today are Pacific Island.
Yep.
And a huge pool of
talent that there is there. And our future
as a country, and certainly as Aucklanders,
but it depends on them doing well
and achieving their goals and aspirations.
And so everything we do as a government
is designed to ensure that. If you think
of
education policy around getting kids into school, or if you think of our health
policy around ensuring that
young kids are vaccinated and given every encouragement to succeed,
and right across the board. So it's a core element of
everything we do in government.
And then we have the ministry,
which is a modest size
ministry with a clear
goal of being a center of excellence within
the government apparatus,
with a set of connections and understanding of
the Pacific peoples in New Zealand.
And also running a series of programs
that have been funded in the past, some of which will continue, some of which will
be folded into more general government
programs as time progresses. And
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Minister. First questions, Carmel.
Great.
We were made aware of the fact that
you, as the Minister for Pacific Peoples, have a performance plan that is
largely
to do with cost savings and how you're going to
run the agency with respect to some of the savings that the government are seeking
to make. But that's not currently
publicly available. Can you speak to that a little bit,
Minister?
Well, as I was talking about in the previous
session, in terms of the 2% savings that are expected right
across the board, and I'll
remind
people who are tuning in for this particular session, across the
country and across the Pacific maybe, on the shortwave tuning in,
that what we're doing here is the annual
budget scrutiny. And the hard, cold fact is that
notwithstanding all the efforts that have been made so far,
New Zealand is still going to be borrowing over $11 billion
in this budget. We have a deficit of over $11 billion, and we've got a
path back to surplus over the next three years.
And no country can continue to spend more than it
earns for a long period of time without just passing the bill to the
next generation. We don't think that's right.
We don't think that's right, and that's why we've got a plan to get back.
So, part of that is an expectation on all
government departments
to have a 2% savings
in place. And the Pacific peoples are no different to that.
And do you think that it's right that that's not
publicly available and that there's no transparency
around
your performance plan as the minister, particularly given
the officials are expected to respond to that and there are
indicators attached to it?
Well, I'm not
quite sure where the mystery is. I thought it's
well known that we're looking for 2% savings.
No, just the plan.
So is there-
How they're going to get there is, well, that's something that we're all working
out together. And I've got every confidence that the
secretary will be able to achieve that.
The plans aren't due until later this year, so we're still under active
consideration.
But you're working to a performance plan that the minister has set for cost
savings?
We're in the planning process and just thinking about, remember the
parameters are to
2029. So we're just working through what the pathway would be,
and that will be due later this year.
Are there already indicators for that, though?
No. We're just working through that process.
Okay. Second question very quickly.
I'll come back to you.
Okay.
Yeah.
Well, I've got a sup on that one, but can I sup-
I'll sup and then go for a question
... maybe ask a quick question?
Yeah.
When are those due?
What?
Uh-
Just this plan. So what we're asking for is transparency on the plan.
We want to see it. We understand you say it's in draft.
When is it due so we can have a look? It's a sup, and then I've got a primary.
Have you got the date on you?
29th of July is when it's due to Treasury, and then it will go
to Cabinet for consideration. So it hasn't been considered by Cabinet-
So 29th of July I'll see it then.
Well, that's when we get it.
That's when we have to submit it.
Not when you get it. It might take a little bit longer.
Might take a little bit longer. Okay, my primary is around the
announcement of 9,000 jobs being cut.
So I want to know-
Yeah
... thinking around whose job's going to get cut at the Ministry of Pacific
Peoples,
and how is that going to impact the program?
Well,
I think the member is referring to the overall
public sector
job changes. And again, people who are tuning in,
back in 2017 when
John Key and Bill English and the previous National government left office, there
were 47,000 public servants,
core public servants. When we came back six years later, there were
63,000. So,
there'd been a very substantial increase
in the number of public servants. And people might ask, "Well, were we getting
better outcomes from that?" Um-
In terms of the core activities of the state.
And so, that was a significant increase over the long
term, so the historic average. And so what we set as a goal was to get back to
55,000.
So if we look in terms of Pacific peoples, I just looked at the-- I asked about the
head count, so back in 2017 there were 37,000 people working for Pacific...
Uh, 37 people. 37 people, full stop.
And by 2023, when we came back, there was 138 people.
So, we had
tripled.
And so, there may be some readjustment.
We're back to 84 now. And
so I don't know the exact sort of makeup of the numbers.
But
the reality was, and
the members here need to take acknowledgement of that,
there was a hiring spree
over an extended period of time. And that was one of the reasons why we're running
massive deficits as a country, and why we as a government have to do
something about it.
So my question was specifically to do with the announcements from the Ministry of
Finance, who specifically talked about the 9,000 jobs within this
time period.
Yes.
So how is that going to impact the Ministry for Pacific Peoples?
Well, it will impact the Ministry of Pacific Peoples-
Have you-
But exactly what number has not been allocated
... you haven't got the numbers yet.
No.
When will you have the numbers?
Well, she just-
Well, that's something that will be...
We've got a period of time to get to that
figure. And
I expect the ministry, like every other ministry, to be-
Okay
... working away to see what's the best way to achieve that.
And there's lots of different elements to that.
It may well be that there are some
operations that can be shared with other ministries.
There may be
looking back to how do we manage to do things in 2017 with a
certain number of people,
and how can we get back to that.
I have a new line of questioning.
I'm interested whether, and this may be an operational question, but I'm interested
whether there's any thinking yet about AI, because this is obviously reshaping our
world at scale and pace right now. And obviously with the
Pacific community, we've got the biggest single city on the planet in
Auckland. And so is there any thinking about
what role, if any, the ministry would play in an AI strategy, both for
that community and also the broader diaspora across the
Pacific?
Well,
go to the secretary, but
there's no question that we're living in a
revolution of sorts
as we speak in terms of technology.
One of the
most amazing areas is
at a very simple, well, not a simple level, but has been
the ability to translate
almost
simultaneously across many, many languages.
And I can only imagine that continuing to grow.
And so that raises enormous
opportunities.
And also challenges of course, because as
larger, wealthier countries get better access to
computing power,
we've got to find a way to make sure that we in New Zealand get
access to as much as we can.
And also,
the broader Pacific policy. But that's more in the scope of foreign affairs.
But in terms of our Pasifika community here in
New Zealand,
that's very much core function of our broader education system as
well as everything else. But is there anything you particularly wanted to add on
that?
Yeah. So firstly, our workforce in the
ministry reflects the Pacific population. It's a young workforce.
It's a workforce that fits the future.
There's huge opportunity for them to contribute to the public service.
So our focus hasn't really been on downsizing, it's been
about capability build and building resilience around
change. Part of that is our AI program.
81% of our staff are already actively using
AI. Last week alone, we had 3,000
weekly prompts and... So staff are highly
active in the future.
And this is really important for us to build that confidence so that they are
highly competitive.
That's great to hear. I'll just ask one supplementary on that.
Because there's sort of been fears that AI will lead to job losses, but I think
what companies are realizing overseas is that the additional productivity that's
coming from the use of that tool actually requires more people often.
So just, is there sort of any thinking yet about not just the use
internally of the tool, but also
increasing awareness in the Pasifika community about the value of AI as
a productivity enabler?
Well, look, I'm sure there are many opportunities.
Yes, different ways of seeing it. But in terms of
as a government, there are many, many things that
we struggle to do and have struggled to do for a very
long period of time.
One of them is
measuring the success or otherwise of various government
programs that we have.
And the use of technology and data to more effectively understand that
is one of the huge opportunities that I think AI will bring right across
the public sector. And Pacific peoples is no
different to anybody else in that regard.
So, huge opportunities there.
And so,
I
can get off topic on that one there but yeah.
All right. New question, ordinately.
Minister, the numbers you espoused before about Pasifika
people, especially here in Aotearoa, they're nearing the half a
million mark, 442,000 at the last census count in
2023. That was also the year you say there was a huge boost or
pop- In terms of personnel at the ministry,
and now it's been reduced by about 57 in 2026, so the
numbers have gone down. There was a huge spike, I understand,
but still, there's huge-
Still more than double what it was in 2017.
What I'm getting to, the point is, is that we
have not only Pasifika, but Māori disproportionately
represented across every system within government control, within
each facet specifically. For the Ministry for Pacific
Peoples, with the decrease and the reductions,
especially within this ministry, what assurances can you give
to all New Zealanders, not just Pacific peoples, but Māori and all
peoples across Aotearoa, that you have Pasifika peoples' backs as the
minister, and that the ministry is actually safe under your leadership?
Well,
the assurance I'll give people is that this is a government that is focused
on fixing the basics and building a
future where all New Zealanders, including Pasifika, are
well-equipped to succeed. And so, one of the most basic things you
can do in the health setting is ensure that kids are properly
immunized. And notwithstanding all the extra people employed by the previous
administration, immunization rates went down substantially.
We used to have, I don't have the exact figure in front of me, about
94% of Pasifika kids immunized when we left
office in 2017, and it just fell off a cliff,
notwithstanding all the extra money that the previous government was throwing
around. And so we're focused on getting that back up, and we've made real progress
since. Same thing with
attendance at school, which is the most fundamental thing to foot, to
actually make some progress in
education and be equipped to succeed in the modern world.
And we had lamentable attendance rates over the last six
years, and we are focused on turning that around.
Okay.
I can give that assurance to anybody tuning in, that this is a government that is
focused on fixing the basics, and equipping Pasifika people
to succeed.
Supplementary: How do you then intend to achieve that when this
specific ministry has suffered 16 million, six zero,
$16 million worth of cuts over the last three years, and now they're also
undergoing further cuts?
Because I think we fundamentally don't agree with the prescription that
the previous administration had, which was that you had to have a little
separately funded
program in place under the label of the Pacific
Peoples Ministry,
and that would somehow automatically lead to better outcomes.
A lot of what we do is just core business of the government, such
as
employment schemes and housing schemes, and so there was money going
in separately into the ministry for those projects, and we think they can be done
better as a core activity of the government.
But still, notwithstanding that, having the expertise and
understanding that the Ministry of Pacific Peoples provides.
New question, Andy.
Well, mine's-
Okay
... it's a new question, but it's also in the same vein.
Just really interested in what success looks like for you, and your
response there has both been about health and education.
But what success looks like and also the role of the Ministry of Pacific Peoples
in delivering that success as opposed to the role of any other agencies of
government. Obviously, it's the interface, I suppose, between the role of the
Ministry of Pacific Peoples and, in this case, you've talked about health and
education. There could be other ministries as well.
Yeah. Well,
success looks like
Pasifika New Zealanders,
those, like I say, the quarter of kids in Auckland
schools being equipped to succeed
in a modern, successful,
rich economy in which we live in. And
we're a party that in a center-right sort of philosophy of equality
of opportunities,
and equipping young people to succeed, and then having good
quality public services that everybody can address
and access. And so, there is a bit of a different sort of
philosophy across governments. There's a tendency
under Labour-led governments to sort of separate-
You don't need to talk about us
You just talk about your own program and-
It's not been critical, necessarily.
It's just that-
Will you go back to the estimates chair?
Hey, hey, hey, hey.
There's a tendency to go that way. We're going the other way, which is to say-
On the answer of this, Carmel
... we see an opportunity to
have the ministry as, like I say, a center of excellence for
across government understanding of Pasifika,
with connections into the community and also-
Sel
... from where appropriate, particular projects that need to be developed.
So you see the Ministry of Pacific Peoples being
essentially an advisor to the delivery agencies-
Well, I wouldn't quite go that far. But that's an important part of the role, yes.
Supplementary.
One, it'll have to be last question, supplementary.
Yeah. Well, it was going to be a primary question, but off the back of the
question that
the member Evan Foster has asked, what advice have you been
giving the Minister for Employment
on Pacific unemployment, given that employment for Pacific
peoples is at 11.9%? So what
advice has the Ministry for Pacific Peoples been giving that
particular ministry on Pacific unemployment?
Well,
there's ongoing discussions around
the transfer of particular projects to Aotearoa.
And-
I'm not asking about projects, policy advice
Yeah. Well,
you can ask the secretary around specific policy advice, but the
advice I'd be giving to my cabinet colleagues is carry on doing
what you're doing in the sense of making-- The best thing we can do
long-term for Pasifika unemployment is to ensure
that more Pasifika kids are at school, and coming out of their school
fully qualified and prepared to succeed in the modern
world. And then the second most useful thing we can do is ensure that we've got a
growing economy
that is creating jobs. And the good news of the budget was the
prediction that New Zealand will be creating, I think,
around 200,000 jobs over the next three years.
And all of those
200,000 jobs present an opportunity for young Pasifika kids to get off the
dole and into work. And we'd back them every step of the way.
Thank you, Minister. Thank you for your time, and thank you for official's time
this afternoon. Appreciate it.
Thank you.